1 
September 18, 202 6 
Bank of Japan 
 
Change in the Guideline for Money Market Operations 
 
1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided, by 
a 7-2 majority vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the 
intermeeting period: [Note] 
The Bank will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 1.25 
percent.1 
2. In accordance with the change in the guideline for money market operations, the Bank decided, 
by a 7-2 majority vote, to change the interest rates applied to its measures.2 [Note] 
(1) Interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility 
The interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility (the interest rate applied to 
current account balances held by financial institutions at the Bank, excluding required 
reserve balances) will be 1.25 percent. 
(2) Basic loan rate3 
The basic loan rate applicable under the complementary lending facility will be 1.5 percent. 
3. Regarding the Funds -Supplying Operations to Support Financing for Climate Change 
Responses, the Bank decided, by a unanimous vote, to change the loan rate to a floating rate 
and set upper limits on the amount of loans, with the aim of providing stable support for private 
sector efforts on climate change while ensuring the smooth conduct of market operations.4 
 
1 The new guideline for money market operations will be effective from September 24, 2026. 
2 The new interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility and the new basic loan rate will be 
effective from September 24, 2026. 
3 The basic loan rate is stipulated in Article 15, paragraph 1, item (ii) of the Bank of Japan Act. The basic 
discount rate in item (i) in the same paragraph also will be 1.5 percent (discounting of bills is currently 
suspended). 
4 The Bank also decided to change the loan rates for the Funds -Supplying Operation to Support Financial 
Institutions in Disaster Areas and the Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral. In addition, the 
Bank decided to remove the Great East Japan Earthquake from the category of designated disasters under the 
Funds-Supplying Operation to Support Financial Institutions in Disaster Areas following the loan 
disbursement in May 2027, given factors such as the recent usage of the operation. 
2 
4. Japan's economy has recovered moderately, although some weakness has been seen in part , 
partly due to the impact of the situation in the Middle East (see Attachment).  Regarding the 
outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue growing moderately . This is because, 
although the impact of the situation in the Middle East is expected to push down economic 
activity, the economy is likely to be underpinned by factors such as the government's various 
measures, in addition to an increase in global AI-related demand. On the price front, the rate of 
increase in the producer price index (PPI) has continued to be high  on a year -on-year basis, 
reflecting the impact of the expansion in AI-related demand, in addition to high crude oil prices 
and the depreciation of the yen. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index 
(CPI, all items less fresh food ) has been moderately rising recently, as upward pressure on 
prices in business-to-business transactions has started to spill over into  consumer prices and 
moves to pass on wage increases to selling prices have been continuing. In this situation,  
medium- to long -term inflation expectations have  continued to rise , and underlying CPI 
inflation has been approaching 2 percent . As explained, Japan's economic activity and prices 
have been developing generally in line with the baseline scenario presented in the July 2026 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices. 
While there are various risks to the baseline scenario, attention continues to be warranted on  
the impact that the situation in the Middle East, the expansion in AI -related demand, and 
developments in foreign exchange rates  have on Japan's economic activity and prices.  As for 
underlying CPI inflation, there is a risk that it will deviate upward to a level above the price 
stability target of 2 percent, given factors such as firms' behavior shifting more toward raising 
wages and prices and medium- to long-term inflation expectations rising. 
Japan's financial conditions have been accommodative. Real interest rates have  remained at 
low levels, mainly in the short - to medium-term zone. Firms' and other entities' demand for 
funds has increased, and financial institutions' lending attitudes have also remained proactive. 
Moreover, issuance conditions for CP and corporate bonds have remained favorable. 
In view of the aforementioned developments in economic activity and prices, risks, as well as 
financial conditions, the Bank judged it appropriate to adjust the degree of monetary 
accommodation from the perspective of sustainable and stable achievement of the price 
stability target of 2 percent. Accommodative financial conditions are expected to be maintained 
after the change in the policy interest rate, continuing to firmly support economic activity. 
5. As for the future conduct of monetary policy, given that underlying CPI inflation has been 
approaching 2 percent and financial conditions have been accommodative, the Bank will 
3 
continue to raise the policy interest rate and adjust the degree of monetary accommodation, in 
response to developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. In 
this regard, it will consider the timing and pace of adjustment, while examining the likelihood 
of realizing the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices and the risks 
to the outlook, including the impact of the situation in the Middle East, the expansion in AI -
related demand, and developments in f oreign exchange rates. In particular, the perspective of 
stabilizing underlying CPI inflation at a level around 2 percent becomes important in order to 
keep the risk of underlying CPI inflation deviating upward to a level above the price stability 
target of 2 percent from materializing and thereby exerting an adverse impact on the economy 
afterward. With the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank will conduct monetary policy 
as appropriate from the perspective of sustainable and stable achievement of the target. 
 
 
[Note] V oting for the action: UEDA Kazuo, HIMINO Ryozo, UCHIDA Shinichi, TAKA TA Hajime, TAMURA 
Naoki, KOEDA Junko, and MASU Kazuyuki. V oting against the action: ASADA Toichiro and SATO 
Ayano. Asada Toichiro dissented, considering that, with the rate of increase in the CPI (all items less 
fresh food) being below 2 percent recently, it could not necessarily be said that the economic situation 
was strong, and it was therefore desirable for the Bank to maintain the guideline for money market 
operations. Sato Ayano dissented, considering that current economic and price developments did not 
appear to have substantially accelerated compared to before, and in this context, it was not appropriate 
for the Bank to raise the policy interest rate at this time. 
 4 
Attachment 
 
Economic Activity and Prices in Japan: Current Situation and Outlook 
 
1. Japan's economy has recovered moderately, although some weakness has been seen in part, 
partly due to the impact of the situation in the Middle East. Overseas economies have grown 
moderately on the whole, although some weakness has been seen in part. Against the backdrop 
of factors such as a solid increase in global AI -related demand,  exports and industrial 
production have started to increase, albeit moderately, and corporate profits have been at high 
levels. Under these circumstances, business fixed invest ment has been on a moderate 
increasing trend, despite being affected by a rise in construction costs. Private consumption has 
been resilient against the background of an improvement in the employment and income 
situation, although weakness has been seen in household sentiment. On the other hand, housing 
investment has been on a declining trend. Public inve stment has continued to be more or less 
flat. Meanwhile, labor market conditions have remained tight. Financial conditions have been 
accommodative. On the  price front, despite factors such as the effects of the government's 
measures to reduce the household burden of higher energy prices , the year-on-year rate of 
increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) has been moderately rising 
recently, being in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent, as the effects of a rise in import prices have been 
emerging, with moves to pass on wage increases to selling prices continuing . Inflation 
expectations have risen moderately. 
2. Japan's economy is expected to continue growing moderately, albeit at a decelerated rate. This 
is because, although the rise in crude oil prices since early spring reflecting the impact of the 
situation in the Middle East is expected to push down economic activity, the economy is likely 
to be underpinned by factors such as the government's various measures and accommodative 
financial conditions, in addition to an increase in global AI-related demand. Japan's economic 
growth rate is likely to rise moderately  thereafter, since it is projected that the adverse effects 
of high crude oil prices will wane and that a virtuous cycle from income to spending will 
gradually intensify. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is 
likely to accelerate to a level clearly above 2 percent from the second half of fiscal 2026. This 
is because, with moves to pass on wage increases to selling prices continuing, the rise in crude 
oil prices to date is expected to push up prices, mainly of energy and goods, and the rise in the 
prices of semiconductors and other items, reflecting the increase in global AI-related demand, 
and the recent depreciation of the yen are likely to lead to an increase in prices, mainly of 