1 
FCA announcement on future cessation and loss of representativeness of the LIBOR 
benchmarks 
05 March 2021 
1. This statement announces the future cessation or loss o f representativeness of the 35 LIBOR
benchmark settings currently published by ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA), an authorised
administrator, regulated and supervised by the FCA.
2. IB
A notified the FCA, following the completion of its recent consultation  and notices of future
departure received from the majority of the panel banks for each LIBOR setting, that it intends to
cease providing all LIBOR settings for all currencies, subject to any rights of the FCA to compel IBA
to continue publication.
3. W
e have completed our assessments of the effect of panel bank departures on LIBOR’s ability to
represent the underlying market, and of how IBA intends to cease providing LIBOR, as required by
the UK Benchmarks Regulation (BMR). We have decided not to require any panel banks to
continue to submit to LIBOR beyond the dates from which they have notified their departure , or
t
o require IBA to continue to publish LIBOR on the basis of panel bank submissions beyond such
dates. We have no intention to use our proposed powers to compel IBA to continue to publish any
of the following 26 LIBOR settings as ’synthetic’ LIBOR (as described below) . Therefore, these 26
L
IBOR settings will permanently cease as we set out below.
• P
ublication of all 7 euro LIBOR settings, all 7 Swiss franc LIBOR settings, the Spot Next, 1-week,
2-month and 12-month Japanese yen LIBOR settings, the overnight, 1-week, 2-month and 12-
month sterling LIBO R settings, and the 1 -week and 2 -month US dollar LIBOR settings will
cease immediately after 31 December 2021.
• P
ublication of the overnight and 12 -month US dollar LIBOR settings will cease immediately
after 30 June 2023.
4. W
e will consult on requiring IBA to continue to publish the 3 remaining sterling LIBOR settings (1-
month, 3-month and 6 -month) for a further period after end- 2021 on a changed methodology
(also known as a ‘synthetic’) basis using the proposed new powers th e government is legislating
to grant us under the BMR. Using our proposed powers in this way would be intended to protect
consumers and market integrity by reducing disruption in markets where it is unlikely to be
feasible to convert  certain outstanding contracts that reference LIBOR to alternative referenc e
rat
es.
5. W
e will consult on requiring IBA also to continue to publish the 1 -month, 3-month and 6-month
J
apanese yen LIBOR settings after end -2021 on a synthetic basis, for one additional year. This
proposed use of our powers would be intended primarily to protect market integrity by allowing
more time for transition away from Japanese yen LIBOR to complete. We do not envisage using
our proposed powers to compel IBA to continue to publish any Japanese yen LIBOR settings after
e
nd-2022, and publication of these settings will consequently cease permanently immediately
after a final publication on 30 December 2022.
2 
6. As the transition away from US dollar LIBOR progresses, we will continue to consider the case for
u
sing these proposed powers also to require continued publication on a synthetic basis of the 1 -
month, 3-month and 6-month US dollar LIBOR settings for a further period after end -June 2023,
taking into account views and evidence from the US authorities and other stakeholders.
7. W
here we decide to require IBA to continue the publication of any settings on a synthetic basis,
the methodology we would propose to require LIBOR's administrator to use is as set out in our
statements of policy described below. Although this methodology provides in our view a fair
approximation of what panel bank LIBOR would have been beyond the end-dates for each of the
panels, LIBOR settings published on this synthetic basis will no longer be representative of the
underlying market and economic reality the setting is intended to measure as those terms are
used in the BMR.
8. C
onsequently it is clear that these 9 LIBOR benchmark settings (1 -month, 3-month and 6-month
s
ettings in each of sterling, Japanese yen and US dollar LIBOR) will no longer be representative of
the underlying market and economic reality that such setting is intended to measure and that
representativeness will not be restored, as set out below.
• I
mmediately after 31 December 2021, the 1 -month, 3 -month and 6 -month Japanese yen
LIBOR settings and the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month sterling LIBOR settings will no longer
be representative and representativeness will not be restored.
• I
mmediately after 30 June 2023, the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month US dollar LIBOR settings
wi
ll no longer be representative and representativeness will not be restored.
9. I
t follows that all 35 LIBOR settings will either cease to be provided by any administrator or no
longer be representative immediately after the dates set out above.
10. W
e make this statement in the awareness that it will engage certain contractual triggers for the
calculation and future application of fallbacks that are activated by pre -cessation or cessation
announcements made by the FCA (howsoever described) in contracts, and in accordance with our
11 March 2020 statement on LIBOR contractual triggers.
11. T
he exercise of our proposed new powers to require continued publication on a synthetic basis is
subject to the enactment of the Financial Services Bill by Parliament. Any decision to use them to
require a methodology change for LIBOR settings will take into account evidence and views from
market participants and our counterpart global authorities, and will be consulted upon in due
course.
12. W
e have also published today our statements of policy  in relation to some of the proposed new
powers that the government is legislating to grant us under the BMR.  The statements of policy
provide more detail of the policy framework which explains why we have no intention to use our
proposed powers to require continued publication on a synthetic basis for 26 of the LIBOR
settings, will con sult on using them for the remaining 3 sterling LIBOR settings and, for one
additional year, the remaining 3 Japanese yen LIBOR settings, and will continue to consider the
case for using them for the 3 US dollar LIBOR settings as described above. It also c onfirms our
i
ntentions with regard to the methodology we would propose to use for any settings published on
a synthetic basis (i.e. a forward looking term rate version of the relevant Risk Free Rate plus a fixed 
3 
spread adjustment calculated over the same period and in the same way as the spread adjustment 
implemented in the IBOR Fallbacks Supplement and the 2020 IBOR Fallbacks Protocol published 
by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association).  
13. We
 remind market participants that, although publication of certain LIBOR settings on a synthetic
basis would be intended to assist legacy contract holders, new use of this synthetic LIBOR by UK
regulated firms in regulated financial instruments would be prohibited under the BMR  as
amended by the Financial Se rvices Bill currently being enacted by Parliament . Continued use by
regulated firms in legacy financial instruments would also be subject to the FCA using its proposed
powers to permit such use. We will consult later in 2021 on which legacy uses of synthetic LIBOR
might be permitted.